SOUND 2SYNTH : Interpreting Sound via FM Synthesizer Parameters Estimation
Zui Chen1∗ , Yansen Jing1∗ , Shengcheng Yuan2∗ , Yifei Xu2 , Jian Wu2 and Hang Zhao1
1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2Beijing DeepMusic Technology Co., Ltd
{chenzui19, jingys19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,{yuansc,xuyf}@lazycomposer.com,
wujian7752@163.com, Zhaohang0124@gmail.com
Abstract
Synthesizer is a type of electronic musical instru-
ment that is now widely used in modern music pro-
duction and sound design. Each parameter configu-
ration of a synthesizer produces a unique timbre and
can be viewed as a unique instrument. The problem
of estimating a set of parameters configuration that
best restore a sound timbre is an important yet com-
plicated problem, i.e.: the synthesizer parameters
estimation problem. We proposed a multi-modal
deep-learning-based pipeline SOUND 2SYNTH , to-
gether with a network structure Prime-Dilated Con-
volution (PDC) specially designed to solve this prob-
lem. Our method achieved not only SOTA but also
the first real-world applicable results on the Dexed
synthesizer, a popular FM synthesizer.
1 Introduction
1.1 Background and Motivation
The rapid development of computer hardware and digital audio
processing technologies has greatly influenced the music in-
dustry in recent years. With the help of Digital Audio Worksta-
tion (DAW) and Virtual Studio Technology (VST), musicians
are now able to finish the entire composition, orchestration,
mixing, and mastering process on their computer or hardware
for special use, which could provide real-time sound feedback
to the musician, and are much cheaper than an actual band or
professional orchestra.
As the virtual instruments become more delicate, they are
also becoming larger in size – professional virtual instrument
libraries are reaching gigabyte level memory and terabyte level
of disk storage for the audio samples – and more expensive to
record and use. Also, many sounds in musicians’ imagination
are not easily recordable or even producible in nature. Both
problems inspired the idea of generating sound by only manip-
ulating digital waveform signals, without the need of using a
large size or a large number of samples.
A synthesizer is an electronic musical instrument that gen-
erates audio signals from given MIDI inputs, relying mainly
*These authors contributed equally to this paper.
†Code, plug-in, demo clips, demo video, and demo songs are all
available at the link: https://github.com/Sound2Synth/.
on computation instead of audio samples. The main types of
synthesizers include: additive/subtractive synthesizers, which
construct waveforms by adding simple waves to silence or
filtering out simple waves from white noises; FM synthe-
sizers, which use cascaded oscillators whose parameters are
controlled by predecessors to obtain complex waveforms at
the output; wavetable-based synthesizers, which manipulate
a short sample (i.e.: a wavetable) or combine multiple sam-
ples to create complex sounds; and analog synthesizers, which
simulate physical circuits or devices to generate sounds.
Most synthesizers have a large number of parameters, which
are necessary for their expressiveness. However, many of the
parameters are non-intuitive for humans, which means that
non-experts can not imagine a sound from a set of parameters
configuration (i.e.: a preset), or conversely, determine a syn-
thesizer preset from a given sound. This is the hard problem of
Digital Sound Design, which is now evolving into a complex
subject and major that requires years of learning and practicing
to expertise in.
Our research addresses the specific problem of synthesizer
parameters estimation in digital sound design: finding a close
synthesizer preset given a sound. This is a problem that is not
well-studied while having a huge potential benefit in terms of
both industrial and artistic perspectives. For example:
• Sound Design: In digital sound design, musicians want
to compose with natural/imaginal sounds as synthesizer
presets (so that the sound can smoothly transfer to dif-
ferent pitches and durations). Synthesizer parameters
estimation is able to remarkably speed up the process of
making new presets, helping musicians to focus on the
creative job only instead of the technical job.
• Sound Compression: A synthesizer preset usually takes
thousands of times or lesser space than the timbre sound
wave it produces, thus synthesizer parameters estimation
can be used in sound compression for efficient storage
or transmission under circumstances that could tolerate
minor trade-offs in quality for speed or memory efficiency
(e.g.: online composing, preview rendering).
• Synthesizer Expressiveness Test: A good synthe-
sizer parameters estimator can also serve as a quanti-
tative benchmark for comparing the expressiveness of
synthesizers, by providing a set of random/naturally-
distributed/domain-specific audio samples and evaluating
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4921
the average distance between the original samples and
the closest generated samples by each synthesizer.
In a nutshell, synthesizer parameters estimation is a problem
of great importance to music creativity and has a great market
value in the modern digital music industry.
1.2 Problem Definition
Formally, a Synthesizer can be viewed as a function mapping
f : Θ f×M→A , whereA is the audio space, Θf is the
configuration space of this particular synthesizer f, each θ∈
Θf is a preset of the synthesizer,M is the MIDI configuration
space of a single note and eachη∈M is the MIDI setting of a
note, specified by note pitch, note velocity, and note duration,
etc. Although this process is influenced by various other
settings including sample rate, bit depth, etc, these settings are
usually fixed and can be easily converted if necessary.
It is worth mentioning that almost all practical synthesizers
are non-surjective functions, which means that there almost
certainly exists audio A∈A that can not be generated by a
specific synthesizer f.
The Synthesizer parameter estimation problem can be for-
mulated as follows: given an audio A∈A and a fixed input
note η0∈M , the goal is to find a preset that can best restore
the audio under a particular distance metric:
min
ˆθ∈Θf
dis(f (ˆθ, η0), A) (1)
Our experiments mainly concentrate on the Dexed synthe-
sizer [Gauthier, 2013], since it is one of the most popular
open-source FM synthesizers, and it has a sufficient amount
of free presets easily accessible on the Internet. We will use
mean squared Euclidean Distance between Mel-Frequency
Cepstral Coefficients Distance (MFCCD) as our evaluation
metric, since MFCCD is proven by experiment to be well-
aligned with human perception
[Terasawa et al., 2005], and
is widely used in various audio-related tasks, e.g.: speech
recognition.
1.3 Related Work
The work in synthesizer parameters estimation can be traced
back to the work of Horner et al. [Horner et al., 1993], which
used a genetic algorithm to find the settings of parameters for
frequency modulation matching synthesis. Mitchell et al. uti-
lized the advances in multi-modal evolutionary optimization to
perform dynamic sound matching of FM synthesizer[Mitchell
and Sullivan, 2005].
Roth [Roth and Yee-King, 2011 ] first introduced neu-
ral networks into this problem and systematically compared
the performance of traditional methods and neural networks.
Matthew Yee-King[Yee-King et al., 2018] further developed
the usage of neural networks by using LSTM++ (bidirectional
LSTM with highway connections) networks. They conducted
experiments to compare their method APVST with various
traditional approaches on the Dexed synthesizer, achieving
comparable performance, while being much more efficient.
However, results comparable to traditional approaches are still
far from sufficient for real-world application.
After Yee-King’s work, researches are also carried out on
different synthesizers, e.g.: InverSynth [Barkan and Tsiris,
2018] on JSyn [Burk, 2014], SerumRNN [Mitcheltree and
Koike, 2021] on Serum [Records, 2014]. Both works are using
only simple network architectures: InverSynth used vanilla
CNN networks, and SerumRNN used vanilla RNN networks.
Also, Jsyn was a small synthesizer whose expressiveness is
not sufficient for wide application, and SerumRNN focused
only on the effects applied to the sounds, instead of the full
preset configuration of Serum.
An interesting method FlowSynthesizer[Esling et al., 2019]
using auto-encoder and normalizing flow, was tested on
Diva
[u-he Software Synthesizers and Effects, 2011 ] – an
analog synthesizer. This method does not rely on a running
synthesizer instance but only on the data points (i.e.: audio
paired with ground truth preset), and it achieved amazing
results at the time. However, it was only able to achieve a rela-
tively satisfactory result on a mere subset of Diva parameters
instead of the entire Diva synthesizer. A similar method was
used in follow by PresetGen V AE[Le Vaillant et al., 2021],
which is the previous SOTA on the Dexed synthesizer.
Another direction is to build differentiable synthesizers [En-
gel et al., 2020], which could then easily be integrated with
neural network models. However, such a result could not be
directly applied to existing commercial synthesizers, which
are powerful but non-differentiable.
According to the works mentioned above, learning-based
results comparable to traditional methods could be achieved,
while there is no work so far producing human-tolerable results
on a powerful synthesizer with full configuration space. Also,
many of the works are limited to a single synthesizer or a
synthesizer type.
Thus, we aim to develop a pipeline that could work on
different types of synthesizers, achieving not only SOTA but
also real-world applicable results on full configuration space.
1.4 Novelty
Our main contributions in this paper are listed as follows:
• We proposed SOUND 2SYNTH – a deep-learning-based
FM synthesizer parameter estimation pipeline, which
does not require an online instance of a synthesizer dur-
ing training. The proposed pipeline has achieved SOTA
in quantitative comparison and is close to applicable in
terms of human perception (Tab. 1). Our pipeline could
also in principle generalize to additive, subtractive and
simple analog synthesizers.
• We proposed Prime-Dilated Convolution (PDC) – a
new convolution network layer structure specially de-
signed for better utilization of Constant-Q Transform
(CQT) chromagram information of an audio sample.
• We demonstrated the benefit of using Multi-modal Fea-
tures in a combined network. The experiment showed
that spectral (visual), waveform (sequential), and statis-
tical (numerical) sound feature information altogether
improved the generalizability of the model.
• We introduced various techniques for optimizing sound
processing for neural networks and revealed many inspir-
ing discoveries, which could as well be applied to other
audio-related tasks.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4922
Figure 1: Screenshot of Dexed. Left: The user interface of the full
Dexed synthesizer. Right: One oscillator of the Dexed synthesizer.
2 Methodology
2.1 A Closer Look at the Dexed Synthesizer
Frequency Modulation synthesis (or FM synthesis) is a form
of sound synthesis whereby the frequency of an oscillator is
changed by modulating its frequency with a modulator. The
frequency of an oscillator is altered in accordance with the
amplitude of a modulating signal. The modulator can be
another oscillator, whose frequency can be modulated again
by the third oscillator, and so on.
The Dexed synthesizer [Gauthier, 2013] is an open-source
software synthesizer with 6 oscillators, aimed to model the
FM synthesis algorithm in the Yamaha DX7 hardware, which
is one of the best known and most successful synthesizers.
2.2 Overall Pipeline
Sound
Preset
ModifiedPreset1
ModifiedPreset2
ModifiedPreset3
ModifiedSound1
ModifiedSound2
ModifiedSound3
Synthesizer
Sound2SynthModelSynthesizerParameterEstimation
Reconstruction
Instrument1
Instrument2
Instrument3
ConvertedInstrumentEvaluation(MFCCD)
(OURS)
ForMusicians
Figure 2: S OUND 2SYNTH overall pipeline illustration.
For each sound, it is first converted to different forms to
address different aspects, including: Short-Time Fourier Trans-
form (STFT) spectrogram, Mel spectrogram, CQT chroma-
gram, MFCC, and other statistical information.
Each form of the input is then fed to the corresponding
backbone that best fits for preprocessing: spectrograms are
handled by CNNs1; chromagram is handled by Prime-Dilated
Convolutional Neural Network (PDCNN), which is an orig-
inal structure and will be elaborated in Sec. 2.3; MFCC is
handled by an LSTM network [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1In fact, among vanilla CNN [LeCun et al. , 1998], VGG [Si-
monyan and Zisserman, 2015 ], ResNet [He et al. , 2016 ] and
DenseNet [Huang et al., 2016], VGG prevailed to be the best back-
bone for audio-related tasks by preliminary experiments.
Spectrogram
CQT Chromagram
Other Features(e.g.: ZCR, RMS)
MFCC
SoundWaveform
CNN(VGG11)
PDCNN
LSTM
Linear
SynthesizerConfiguration
Linear
GlobalFeatures
Local Features
MaskedConnections(byparametersoroscillators)
Figure 3: S OUND 2SYNTH model architecture illustration.
1997]; other statistical information is handled by simple MLPs.
The processed features of each input form are concatenated
to obtain the global features, containing all the information
extracted from the input audio.
For parameters estimation, we first use a single linear layer
with non-linearity to process the global features. Then we
split the processed global features into groups of local features
divided by oscillators or specific parameters. Then the local
features are dealt with by multiple layers of linear and non-
linearity connections masked according to parameters.
Finally, each parameter prediction is derived from the os-
cillator’s local feature group using additional MLPs. Since
continuous parameters in synthesizers usually have minimal
precision, we can convert all continuous parameters into dis-
crete parameters, therefore converting all real-value estimation
problems to classification problems.
It is worth highlighting that, our pipeline supports not only
online training but also training via offline datasets, which
means it does not require access to a synthesizer instance
during training. Synthesizer rendering is itself a computation-
heavy operation, which would become the bottleneck if in-
volved in the training procedure. Thus our workflow that al-
lows separating the model from a synthesizer instance is more
efficient and sometimes necessary in a real-world scenario.
Thus, we evaluate our model on configuration space Θf
during training. That is if we denote the network as Nf,φ :
A →Θf , parameterized by φ, instead of optimizing the
following true objective over an offline datasetD:
min
φ
LMFCCD(φ)
= min
φ
E(Ai,θi)∼D[MFCCD(f (Nf,φ(Ai), η0), Ai)] (2)
During training, we only aim to optimize the Mean
Squared Error (MSE) between predicted parameters and the
groundtruth parameters:
min
φ
LMSE(φ) = min
φ
E(Ai,θi)∼D[MSE(Nf,φ(Ai), θi)] (3)
This may cause dis-alignment between the training objec-
tive and the desired goal since:
• Parameters have different importance, a wrongly pre-
dicted “coarse” parameter has a larger influence than a
wrongly predicted “fine” parameter.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4923
Mel spectrogram
Waveform
A： Sine Wave B：Piano C：Violin
Figure 4: Illustration of different sound timbres having different
harmonic features. From left to right, audios are obtained from sine
wave, piano, and violin, separately. The audios are transformed into
Mel-spectrogram. The phenomenon of multi-stripes shape due to the
harmonics is very clear in these acoustic scenes.
• Different configurations (in terms of numerical values of
parameters) may produce similar sound timbres.
We proposed gradient-inspired weighting technique to han-
dle this problem, which will be explained in Sec. 2.5.
2.3 Prime Dilated Convolution
Intuition
The general CNN treats image and spectrogram as the same
data structure and ignores significant distinctions in their con-
tents. One of the most essential distinctions comes from the
harmonic characteristics of sound. Due to the physical proper-
ties of resonance frequency and mechanical waves, whenever
a sound vibrates at fundamental frequency F0, a series of
frequencies at its integer multiples ( 2F0, 3F0, etc.), called
harmonics, are also likely to vibrate. This fact results in a
common observation of multi-stripes shape vertically stacking
in the spectrogram, as depicted in Fig. 4. In this paper, we
refer to this phenomenon as harmonic features.
Considering relationships among harmonics as different
timbres, downstream networks (in this case, synthesizer pa-
rameters classifier) can utilize and leverage these harmonic
features to improve performance. PDC constructs a sparse
filter by expanding the concept of dilated convolution to accu-
rately reach all the integer harmonics in a log-scale spectro-
gram. Unlike the regular dilated convolution which has a fixed
dilated step, PDC’s dilated location is not evenly distributed,
since the distance between two harmonics in a spectrogram
is not constant. PDC reaches all integer harmonics not at
once, but through stacking itself. We apply the mathematical
rule of prime factorization, decomposing an integer into the
product of a few prime numbers. These primes are further
decomposed into the product of some integer ratios between 1
and 2. PDC’s dilated location is then built according to these
ratios. In this way, PDC has a fixed receptive field, and it
only requires a few primes to complete the filter construction,
rather than traversing every integer.
Prerequisite
Let X∈ RC×K×T denote the spectrogram, where C is the
number of channels, K is the number of frequency bins, and
T is the number of temporal segments. Let f (k) denote the
frequency at the k-th bin, then X(c, k, t) refers to the energies
of sound in c-th channel, at the t-th time frame, around fre-
quency f (k). The inverse function of f is denoted as f−1(·),
which gives the index of the frequency bin according to the
real frequency.
The only prerequisite of PDC is for X to be a log-scale
spectrogram, which means thatf (k) is an exponential function.
In this paper, we use standard Constant-Q Transform (CQT)
to generate spectrograms, where fCQT (k) = fmin2k/B, fmin
is the lowest frequency that CQT covers (by default, fmin≈
32.70Hz), and B denotes bins per octave, i.e., the number of
bins between any frequency and its double frequency, which
refers to the resolution of the spectrogram. The goal of prime-
dilated convolution is to reach any integer harmonics in the
spectrogram by setting the dilated location. Thus, there is a
need to measure the distance between two harmonics. Let
d(n, m, F) = |f−1(mF )− f−1(nF )| denote the distance
of bins between n-times and m-times harmonics based on
their common fundamental frequency F . In CQT, the distance
d(n, m, F) does not change with F .
∀n, m∈ N, ∀F1, F2∈ R+,
d(n, m, F1) = d(n, m, F2) =
B log2
m
n
 (4)
We will use d(n, m)instead of d(n, m, F) in the remaining
part of the paper for simplicity.
Although d(n, m)does not change with F , it is affected
by n and m, according to Eq. (4). Therefore, the dilated
step cannot be constant. Because n and m may vary within
a wide range, solving Eq. (4) to get every possible distance
between two harmonics would create a huge amount of dilated
locations, i.e., creating a tall and dense filter with a lot of
parameters. Instead, we introduce the prime-ratio function to
represent all the distances using a small list of prime numbers
and create a sparse filter.
Prime-Ratio Function
For any prime number p, the prime-ratio function r(p) is
defined as follows.
r(p) = 2−sp, s = max{s∈ N|2s < p} (5)
Given the mathematical rule of prime factorization, i.e., for
every n∈ N and n≥ 2, there exists only one way to de-
compose n into the product of prime powers. Considering
that r(2) = 2 , therefore, p = r(2)sr(p), and the following
theorem holds true for every integer.
Theorem 1. F or alln≥ 2, n can be represented in exactly
one way as a product of the prime-ratio powers, i.e.,
n =
lY
i=1
r(pi)αi (6)
where p1 < p2 <··· < pl are prime numbers and αi’s are
positive integers.
Calculating d(1, n)based on Eq. (6) results in the following
equation:
d(1, n) =
lX
i=1
αid(1, r(pi)) (7)
Eq. (7) states that the distance between any integer harmonic
and its fundamental frequency can be represented as a finite
linear summation of the prime-ratio’s distance d(1, r(pi)),
where d(1, r(pi)) has two characteristics:
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4924
flip
fuse
Asymmetric 
version
Symmetric 
version
Figure 5: Main concept of the prime-dilated convolution, illustrated
with the hyper-parameters B = 12and l = 4. (a) shows the dilated
structure of asymmetric version, where j is index, pj is the j-th
smallest prime, r(pj) is the prime-ratio function, d(1, r(pj)) is the
distance of bins to the bottom line, ⃗ vis the trainable parameters, ⃗ wis
the filter after dilation, and kj is the dilated location. (b) illustrates
the way the filter shifts and stacks to capture all the harmonics in a
log-scale spectrogram. (c) introduces the symmetric version of PDC
which is constructed from the first version’s flip and fusion.
1. It always represents the distance between two integer
harmonics, because according to Eq. (4) and (5),
d(1, r(pi)) = d(2si , pi) (8)
where 2si and pi are both integer numbers.
2. It always lies between0 and B, since r(p)∈ (1, 2] clearly
is true for every prime, and 0 = d(1, 1) < d(1, r(pi))≤
d(1, 2) = B.
Formulation
The main concept of PDC is inspired by the above theorem
and their inferences. Because: 1) any integer can be repre-
sented as the product of r(p); 2) the product of r(p) appears
as the summation of d(1, r(p)); and 3) if the dilated loca-
tion is set as d(1, r(p)), the summation refers to the shift and
stack of convolution operation. In other words, if a series of
distance d(1, r(pi)) is taken as dilated locations as shown in
Fig. 5, then any integer harmonics will be captured by the shift
and stack of the filter. For example, 6 = r(2)2r(3), so the
six-times harmonics can be reached by the stack of dilation
d(1, r(2)), d(1, r(2)) and d(1, r(3)). In our experiments, we
obtain such a stack by inserting a single PDC filter after every
convolutional layer. All the distances d(1, r(p)) are no greater
than B, leaving PDC with a fixed receptive field.
In practice, the dilated location in a filter has to be an in-
teger, but d(1, r(pi)) is often an irrational. Therefore, PDC
constructs the dilation according to the integer approximation
of d(1, r(pi)) sequence, which is formally defined as follows:
Let p1 < p2 <··· < pl denote the smallest l prime num-
bers selected. Let kj denote the integer which is the closest to
d(1, r(pj)), we then have:
k0 = 0,
kj = arg min
k
|k− B log2 r(pj)|, j = 1, . . . , l(9)
We introduce two versions of the PDC filter in terms of how
to construct the dilated locations.
Asymmetric version. Let K = {kj}l
j=0 denote the set
of dilated locations. Let vector ⃗ v= (v 0, v1, . . . , vl) denote
the trainable parameters in PDC. Let ⃗ w= (w0, w1, . . . , wB)
denote the vector after dilation, where the receptive field is
(B + 1)× 1. The values of wk are defined as follows.
wkj = vj, j = 0, 1, . . . , l (10)
wk = 0, k /∈ K
Eq. (11) creates an asymmetric structure ⃗ wwhich covers only
higher harmonics, as shown in Fig. 5 (a) and (b).
Symmetric version. Symmetric PDC is created by flipping
and fusing the asymmetric version, as shown in Fig. 5 (c). Let
K ={kj}l
j=−l denote the set of dilated locations, where the
negative index of k−j is defined as kj’s opposite:
k−j =−kj, j = 1, . . . , l (11)
Let vector ⃗ v= (v−l, . . . , vl) denote the trainable parameters
in PDC, and ⃗ w= (w−B, . . . , wB) denote the vector after
dilation, where the receptive field is (2B + 1)× 1. The values
of wk are defined as follows:
wkj = vj, j =−l, . . . , l (12)
wk = 0, k /∈ K
The convolution operationpdc(·) can be parameterized with
the dilated filter constructed by ⃗ w.
2.4 Multi-modal Feature Engineering
Besides spectrograms, chromagrams, and MFCC, we also
utilized certain statistical features in the network, which are
closely related to sound timbre. For example, the following
information is widely used in audio processing tasks:
• Amplitude Envelop: The changes in the amplitude of a
sound over time.
• RMS Energy: The root mean square energy of audio.
•
Zero Crossing Rate: The rate at which a signal changes
between positive value and negative value.
• Wiener Entropy: Also known as Spectral Flatness, a
metric to measure whether a sound is tonal or noisy.
Notice that the information is scalars per time step, given
that a fixed input note has a fixed duration, we can directly
use an MLP mapping from time steps to feature dimensions to
process each statistical information.
2.5 Techniques
Label Smoothing
As mentioned above, by discretizing continuous parameters,
all parameter estimation could be treated as classification prob-
lems. In practice, all continuous parameters are in [0, 1] range
and are divided into K segments, as in a K-way classification
task.
Unlike normal classification tasks, discretized numerical
classes are not symmetric – wrongly classifying a class as
an adjacent class has a smaller influence than classifying it
as an arbitrary other class. Thus, we can split part of the
probability mass of the ground truth label into neighboring
classes. Technically, the ground-truth label of length K would
first be 1d-convoluted with a Gaussian kernel of σ = σ0/K,
normalized to have a total probability mass sum to 1, and then
be used as the target for cross-entropy loss computation.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4925
Figure 6: Different Algorithms. There are 32 Algorithms in total.
Gradient-Inspired Weighting
As mentioned in Eq. (2.2), only considering MSE loss on
parameter space could result in overfitting the configuration
space, while performing badly in the audio space.
Observation 1. Most parameters in most presets are local
continuous: a small change in the preset would also indicate
a small change in the rendered audio and MFCC.
This implies that we can approximate local audio space loss
using a linear loss term.
Observation 2. Based on preliminary experiments, our model
would be able to generate predictions relatively close to the
ground truth.
This implies that we can use the gradient field around
ground truth θ∗ to substitute the one around prediction ˆθ.
Combining the observations, we can approximately state:
∂LMFCCD(θ)
∂θi

θ=ˆθ
= ∂LMFCCD(θ)
∂LMSE(θi)


θ=ˆθ
· ∂LMSE(θi)
∂θi


θ=ˆθ
≈ ∆LMFCCD(θ)
∆LMSE(θi)


θ=θ∗
· ∂LMSE(θi)
∂θi


θ=ˆθ
(13)
By preprocessing ∆LMFCCD(θ)
∆LMSE(θi)

θ=θ∗
for each parameter θi of
each preset θ∗ in datasetD, we can estimate an importance
weight of prediction ˆθi, to be used in training.
This technique could be applied only if the number of train-
ing samples in datasetD is small, since rendering audio using
a synthesizer and computing audio space loss for every param-
eter of every data point is very time-consuming. Optimizing
this method will be left as future work.
3 Dataset
There are 155 parameters for the Dexed synthesizer in total:
87 continuous parameters, 66 discrete parameters, and 2 fixed
parameters (Algorithm and Output).
Algorithm is a special parameter in Dexed, which deter-
mines the modulation relationship between the six oscillators
(Fig. 6). The physical meaning of all parameters depends on
the choice of Algorithm. WLOG, we restrict our experiment
on a fixed Algorithm setting. In practical application, a model
should be trained for different algorithms respectively. And
then we select the output of the model with the smallest audio
space loss as the final output of the system.
There is another special parameter called Output, which
controls the volume of the generated sound. In our datasets,
we fixed the value of Output to the maximum value, otherwise,
the generated audio loudness of many presets is so low that it
affects the perception of the human ear. In the model training
and inferencing process, we also fixed the Output parameter,
which is consistent with the data set. Fixing this parameter is
also a reasonable decision in practice since users can easily
adjust the overall volume of the synthesizer output afterward,
and it is often necessary to do so.
We combined three different methods to generate datasets:
• Preset Based: We collected 100k+ presets on the Internet,
which are widely used in real-life music composition. We
input each preset θi into the Dexed synthesizer to render
the corresponding audio files Ai. We split the preset-
audio pairs into 32 sub-datasets according to different
values of Algorithm.
• Preset Augmentation: We applied simple data augmen-
tation to enlarge the dataset. Given a preset, we can fix
the value of most of its parameters and then uniformly
sample the values of the remaining parameters.
2 Note
that randomly generated presets may not be audible, we
set a minimum threshold of audible volume to sieve those
presets out.
• Random Walk Based: To improve and test generalizabil-
ity, besides collecting presets online, we also randomly
sampled presets from configuration space to construct a
random dataset. Similarly, we only preserved presets that
can generate audible sounds.
4 Results
Quantitative Results
on Dexed
Method MFCCD
*Hill Climbing 21.96
*Genetic Algorithm 31.32
APVST MLP 31.38
APVST
LSTM 32.76
APVST LSTM++ 22.59
PresetGen V AE 14.70
*Similarity Threshold 10 ∼ 15for Human Perception
SOUND2
SYNTH (OURS) 6.32
SOUND2
SYNTH multi-modal (OURS) 5.36
Table 1: Experiment results. MFCCD is the lower the better. All
MFCCDs are measured under T6 setting: 6 oscillators on Dexed.
The detailed experiment settings are elaborated in Ap-
pendix. A.
From a quantitative perspective (Tab. 1), our model largely
outperforms previous SOTA: PresetGen V AE[Le Vaillant et
2Dexed presets are grouped into different themes, which are split
and augmented separately so that there is no data leakage during
augmentation.
*These figures obtained from APVST [Yee-King et al., 2018 ].
Our subjective listening test also agrees with this similarity threshold.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4926
Figure 7: Four sampled spectrogram cases. Ground truth audios are
on the top and audios generated using predicted parameters are on
the bottom inside each group.
al., 2021].3 From a visual perspective (Fig. 7), the spectro-
grams of our predictions are very similar to that of the ground
truths. From an auditory perspective, audios generated using
predicted preset and the ground truth audio are very alike.
5 Conclusion
We proposed a novel multi-modal pipeline, along with a prime-
dilated convolution structure and many other useful techniques
in audio processing, to tackle the synthesizer parameters esti-
mation problem. The result of our pipeline, S OUND 2SYNTH ,
is not only significantly better than previous SOTA on the
Dexed synthesizer but also able to reach human auditory per-
ception precision. We have released code, plug-in, audio de-
mos, and example use cases in which our plug-in is boosting
musicians’ creativity and simplifying the process of creation
substantially. This could have an impact on the development
of AI for art in the field of music and sound design, and it
could be beneficial for other audio processing tasks in the
future.
A Experiment Settings
WLOG, we fixed the input note η0 to be at the middle C pitch
(C4). The note is always pressed with maximum velocity, sus-
tained for 4 beats, and recorded 8 beats in total, under tempo
120 bpm. All audios are converted to 48kHz sample rate and
32 bit depth. All 6 oscillators of Dexed are used, including
155 parameters in total: 87 continuous parameters, 66 classi-
fication parameters, and 2 fixed parameters. All continuous
parameters are discretized into 64 classes.
Our experiments are carried out on a pre-generated dataset
containing 30106 training/validation data points and 1679 test
data on Dexed. Among the training/validation data points,
6191 are directly sampled from existing presets, 22237 are
augmented from those presets, and 1678 are generated purely
at random. In practice, 80% of the data points are used for
training and 20% are held out for validation. Notice that the
test dataset is generated from independent held-out themes of
presets and random-walk is not used, preventing data leakage.
3MFCCD metric is influenced by the number of filter banks,
however, we computed MFCCD under both 13-band ( [Yee-King
et al., 2018 ]) and 40-band ([Le Vaillant et al., 2021 ]) settings and
observed no remarkable difference in the evaluation results. Thus we
reported the 13-band MFCCD in Tab. 1.
On model architecture, the extracted global features have
the same dimension of 2048 for all model structures. In the
case of the multi-modal structure, each backbone is assigned
a small portion of features. Specifically, convolutional back-
bones, which are used to extract features from spectrogram
and CQT chromagram, each have an output dimension of 512,
while other backbones, which are used to extract features from
waveform, MFCC, or statistical information, each have an
output dimension of 128. The masked classifier has 64 hidden
neurons for each group (a parameter or an oscillator).
We trained our models using the AdamW [Loshchilov and
Hutter, 2019] optimizer with a universal weight decay 10−4
and a linear warm-up cosine annealing scheduler with 4 fixed
warm-up epochs and a peak learning rate 2× 10−4 over at
most 30 epochs. We used a virtual batch size of 64 data points
per batch by using gradient accumulation. We adopted training
tricks including gradient clipping, snapshot, early stopping,
stochastic weight averaging, etc. It is worth noticing that small
Gaussian noise is added to training data points to improve the
robustness of the model.
We trained each of our models on a Linux server using a
single NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080Ti GPU. The maximum
GPU RAM usage is no more than 9GB for a properly chosen
physical batch size.
B S OUND 2S YNTH Plug-In
Figure 8: Screenshot of SOUND 2SYNTH plug-in built on Dexed. The
part highlighted by the rectangle is the SOUND 2S YNTH interface.
Using our S OUND 2SYNTH model, we developed and re-
leased a plugin based on the Dexed synthesizer. The plug-in
first “Ping” the server running the neural network to establish
a connection. Then by “Match”ing an input audio file, our
SOUND 2SYNTH model will automatically calculate the corre-
sponding parameters and assign them back to the synthesizer.
The plug-in also supports “Download” to serialize and save
preset in human-readable JSON format.
Ethical Statement
There are no ethical issues.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4927
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Xiaoguang Liu from Beijing DeepMu-
sic Technology Co., Ltd for providing computing resources
and managing the project. We would also like to thank Yang
Yuan and Jiaye Teng from IIIS, Tsinghua University for sup-
porting this research.
References
[Barkan and Tsiris, 2018] Oren Barkan and David Tsiris.
Deep synthesizer parameter estimation. CoRR,
abs/1812.06349, 2018.
[Burk, 2014] Phil Burk. jsyn. https://github.com/philburk/
jsyn, 2014. Accessed: 2022-06-18.
[Engel et al., 2020] Jesse H. Engel, Lamtharn Hantrakul,
Chenjie Gu, and Adam Roberts. DDSP: differentiable
digital signal processing. In ICLR, volume abs/2001.04643,
2020.
[Esling et al., 2019] Philippe Esling, Naotake Masuda,
Adrien Bardet, Romeo Despres, and Axel Chemla-
Romeu-Santos. Universal audio synthesizer control with
normalizing flows. CoRR, abs/1907.00971, 2019.
[Gauthier, 2013] Pascal Gauthier. dexed. https://github.com/
asb2m10/dexed, 2013. Accessed: 2022-06-18.
[He et al., 2016] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing
Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In CVPR. IEEE, 2016.
[Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] Sepp Hochreiter and
J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural
computation, 9:1735–80, 12 1997.
[Horner et al., 1993] Andrew Horner, James Beauchamp, and
Lippold Haken. Machine tongues xvi: Genetic algorithms
and their application to fm matching synthesis. Computer
Music Journal, 17(4):17–29, 1993.
[Huang et al., 2016] Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, and Kilian Q.
Weinberger. Densely connected convolutional networks.
CoRR, 2016.
[Le Vaillant et al., 2021] Gwendal Le Vaillant, Thierry Du-
toit, and S´ebastien Dekeyser. Improving synthesizer pro-
gramming from variational autoencoders latent space. In
DAFx20in21, 2021.
[LeCun et al., 1998] Yann LeCun, L´eon Bottou, Yoshua Ben-
gio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied
to document recognition. Proc. IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324,
1998.
[Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank
Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR,
2019.
[Mitchell and Sullivan, 2005] Thomas Mitchell and Charlie
Sullivan. Frequency modulation tone matching using a
fuzzy clustering evolution strategy. In AES, 2005.
[Mitcheltree and Koike, 2021] Christopher Mitcheltree and
Hideki Koike. Serumrnn: Step by step audio VST effect
programming. CoRR, abs/2104.03876, 2021.
[Records, 2014] Xfer Records. Serum: Advanced wavetable
synthesizer - xfer records. https://xferrecords.com/products/
serum, 2014. Accessed: 2022-06-18.
[Roth and Yee-King, 2011] Martin Roth and Matthew Yee-
King. A comparison of parametric optimization techniques
for musical instrument tone matching. In AES, 2011.
[Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015] Karen Simonyan and An-
drew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann
LeCun, editors, ICLR, 2015.
[Terasawa et al., 2005] Hiroko Terasawa, Malcolm Slaney,
and Jonathan Berger. Perceptual distance in timbre space.
In ICAD, 01 2005.
[u-he Software Synthesizers and Effects, 2011] u-he Soft-
ware Synthesizers and Effects. Diva: The spirit of analogue
— u-he. https://u-he.com/products/diva, 2011. Accessed:
2022-06-18.
[Yee-King et al., 2018] Matthew John Yee-King, Leon Fed-
den, and Mark d’Inverno. Automatic programming of VST
sound synthesizers using deep networks and other tech-
niques. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell., 2(2):150–
159, 2018.
Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-22)
Special Track on AI, the Arts and Creativity
4928